welcome to equation strict where in each
video I think some of the most important
equations and Max & strictland back
layer by layer so that hopefully
everyone can understand what they mean
this week we're looking at the most
beautiful equation in max Euler's
identity
the reason this equation is deemed so
beautiful is the fact that it's so short
and so simple and yet it captures some
of the most complex behavior in the
whole of math and he study was actually
done a few years ago by scheme of
neuroscientist and basically they took a
group of mathematicians and put them
inside an fMRI scanner which showed
activity in their brain and then they
showed them max equations and actually
found at the same part of your brain the
sort of buzzes and lights up when you
see a great work of art or you hear of a
beautiful piece of music the same part
of your brain will actually light up
when you see a beautiful mathematical
equation and this equation oilin
identity was actually deemed to be the
most beautiful of all of the math
equations so why is this equation so
important as well as being beautiful
well to start with our first layer is
the fact that the equation actually has
five continents in there five
mathematical constants or five numbers
so you have e you have I PI 1 and 0 and
these 5 constants are pretty much the
five most important mathematical
constants in existence and they're all
there in this one equation and it's just
so elegant so beautiful it's just these
five constants with a plus and an equals
two point seven one is two plus alone
over the numbers it goes on forever and
E is my favorite number and it pops up
everywhere when you're thinking about
growth so growth rate and rate of change
of objects or variables he is sort of
the natural rate of change just pops up
everywhere our next number is pi so pi
is 3.14159
and goes on forever and you can define
high as the circumference of a circle
the distance all the way around the edge
divided by the diameter so the business
across the circle where you pass through
the middle point ends of a circles which
by extension agency the skiers pioneers
and because lots of things in our
universe are variable then PI comes up
everywhere in math and physics so this
is I which is the square root of -1 this
might seem a bit alien to to some of you
but like you can calculate the square
root of 4 as 2 so 2 times 2 gives you 4
3 times 3 gives you 9 so 2 is the square
root of 4 3 is the square root of 9 but
basically saying what number times
itself gives you that that number so 4
minus 1 with real numbers as they're
called you cannot work out the square
root of a negative number we just don't
have it it doesn't exist the max so what
we did is mathematicians was to invent
an imaginary number which recalls I this
massive grade you've got a problem you
just invent a number to fix it I is the
square root of -1 which means that I
times I gives you minus 1 so now you can
get the square root of any negative
number so for example the square root of
minus 9 is going to be 3i because 3
times 3 is 9 I times I is minus 1 9
times minus 1 minus sign for the second
layer of our equation that we now
stripped back to we need to think about
Siri and the way in which mathematical
functions are defined so this might get
a little technical but bear with me
we'll all make sense and there are three
functions in particular that we want to
consider and I've written them out here
so we have at the top we've got side
we've got cosine and then we've got the
exponential function so sine and cosine
are the usual functions you've hopefully
heard
from trigonometry at school sohcahtoa
or silly old hairy quarter herring
calling over America that's how I used
to remember it
they are mathematical functions they
were telling you how the angles in a
triangle relates to the lengths of the
sides of that triangle but they also can
be defined like this so sine of any
number X is equal to the number minus X
cubed over 3 factorial X to the fifth
over 5 factorial etc and this carries on
with the same patterns and the factorial
here just means the number kinds all the
ones below it so 3 factorial is 3 times
2 times 1 5 factorial 5 times 4 and 3
times 2 times 1 why we use an
exclamation mark I have no idea this is
what sign looks like that's all you need
to know this is what cars can be written
like again it's fine it's just how we
define the mathematical function and
this is the exponential function and the
reason I've written the exponential
function is if we look back at audience
equation we have e to the power of
something here and this is what's going
on over here knowing these three
functional forms for sine cosine and
Exponential's two seemingly unrelated
what's oil are actually spotted by just
looking at them was that you can write
all three in the same equation so to
start with you could maybe think well if
we add cos and sine then you get all the
correct powers of X you know you get one
from X of x squared and X cube X to the
fourth X to the fifth and that's what
you've got on your exponential it
doesn't quite work because it's a minor
science floating around but this is
where I comes into it because I times
itself I squared is minus one so every
time you have a minus sign you just need
an I squared term in there and this is
what I was spotted so if you actually
write these out and
come back plus I times sine max adding
these two together napple you don't
quite get e to the X because these are
all pluses and these have got some
minuses it but what happens is if
instead of X you take this to be I X so
wherever there's an X just replace it
with I times X we can do that and now if
you add all these terms together you get
exactly e to the IX and this is what
Euler spotted and this is so important
because it relates cos and sine and
triangles trigonometry to the
exponential function which is all about
growth and growth rates rate of change
so things are just seemingly are so so
different oiler shows they're the same
and they can be written in this format
in this equation and Euler's identity is
just a special form of this equation
because here this is what e to the i-x
equals so if you just put X equal to pi
then you get Oilers identity for a third
and final layer stripping back Oilers
identity we're going to think about what
it means geometrically because this
equation hiding underneath there is just
the unit circle so in circle of radius 1
and to see this first thing we have to
think about is the the graph of sine and
cosine so we've got cosine at the top
cause at the top sign underneath the
important thing is these are defined
mathematical functions so we can work up
their values and they always lie between
minus 1 and 1 they both just kind of
oscillate wiggle around 0 always between
minus 1 and 1 that's the key thing and
then the other thing we have to think
about is what it means for a complex
number or the imaginary numbers so if
you go back to probably your
as a maths lesson in primary school
you're counting are you counting along
the number line so you know you start
one two three it's like a
one-dimensional number line but when
you've now got imaginary numbers you can
go across a certain amount with your
real part of real number then you can
also go up or down according to your
imaginary number so instead of a number
line you now have a two-dimensional
plane of numbers so like you can think
of it as a a piece of paper that goes on
forever but it's two-dimensional and
what this equation here or Euler's
equation the general form of oil is
identity what this equation is saying is
how far you're going along the real
number line is given by the value of
course and then how far you're going
along the imaginary number line so how
far up or down is given by assignment
because there's an eye there and that
gives you your e to the i-x and what you
find is because coding sign can only be
between minus 1 and 1 this equation
actually gives you a circle of radius 1
on your two-dimensional plane of numbers
the Euler's identity is just giving you
one point on this circle when your angle
is equal to PI which is 180 degrees from
your starting point so we measure angles
in the positive x axis around 180
degrees give you exactly this point
which is minus 1 and of course e to the
I pi is equal to minus 1 so plus 1 you
get your 0 you get Euler's identity but
from just looking at equations you
probably wouldn't know that it's hiding
this beautiful geometry of the circle in
the complex plane and this is sort of
why I wanted to like strip back the
layers of this equation to really reveal
the hidden beauty the hidden complexity
of the masks that sort of underlying
it's very simple looking equator
so now hopefully next time you see
Oilers identity the most beautiful
mathematical equation that exists you
will hopefully now understand just why
it's so useful and not just being
ordered its beauty but also the complex
mathematical ideas that underpin such a
simple equation I hope you enjoyed it
make sure to tune in for the next one
and of course make sure you follow me
you can find me on twitter facebook and
instagram at tom rocks maps thank you
for watching